doc/index.rst, before:

.. Placebo documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Wed Aug  3 23:50:37 2016.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome to Placebo's documentation!
===================================

Introduction
============

Placebo is a tool for mocking external API's in python applications. It uses httmock or httpretty as mocking backend.


Why this is useful
------------------

Consider following function:

.. code-block:: python

    def get_movie(title, year):
        """Sends a request to omdbapi to get movie data.

        If there is a problem with connection returns None.
        """
        url = 'http://www.omdbapi.com/'

        params = {'t': title,
                  'y': year,
                  'plot': 'short',
                  'r': 'json'}
        response = requests.get(url, params=params)
        if not response.ok:
            return None
        resp = response.json()
        return {
            'language': resp['Language'],
            'director': resp['Director'],
            'rated': resp['Rated'],
            'title': resp['Title']}

Let's think about how we could test this function. A classic way to test this code is
following:


.. code-block:: python

   class RawAPITests(TestCase):
   
       @mock.patch('requests.get')
       def test_get_movie_with_valid_response(self, fake_get):
           fake_response = fake_get.return_value
           fake_response.ok = True
           fake_response.json.return_value = {
               'Actors': 'Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving',  # noqa
               'Awards': 'Won 4 Oscars. Another 33 wins & 44 nominations.',
               'Country': 'USA',
               'Director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
               'Genre': 'Action, Sci-Fi',
               'Language': 'English',
               'Metascore': '73',
               'Plot': 'A computer hacker learns from mysterious rebels about the true nature of his reality and his role in the war against its controllers.',  # noqa
               'Poster': 'http://ia.media-imdb.com/images/M/MV5BMTkxNDYxOTA4M15BMl5BanBnXkFtZTgwNTk0NzQxMTE@._V1_SX300.jpg',  # noqa
               'Rated': 'R',
               'Released': '31 Mar 1999',
               'Response': 'True',
               'Runtime': '136 min',
               'Title': 'The Matrix',
               'Type': 'movie',
               'Writer': 'Lilly Wachowski, Lana Wachowski',
               'Year': '1999',
               'imdbID': 'tt0133093',
               'imdbRating': '8.7',
               'imdbVotes': '1,204,431'}
   
           movie = get_movie('matrix', 1999)
           self.assertEqual(movie,
                            {'director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
                             'rated': 'R',
                             'language': 'English',
                             'title': 'The Matrix'})
   
       @mock.patch('requests.get')
       def test_get_movie_with_500_response(self, fake_get):
           fake_response = fake_get.return_value
           fake_response.ok = False
           fake_response.json.return_value = ''
   
           movie = get_movie('matrix', 1999)
           self.assertEqual(movie, None)

This tests are fine. But they has two main disadvantages. First, code for mocking and actual function invocation is done in the same place which makes it hard to read. Second, if we keep writing similar tests we will probably copy the data for every test.

Purpose of placebo is to separate data from the actual tests. So It would be a lot easier to reason about.

Here is how same code could be implemented with placebo:

First we create a placebo object for that endpoint.


.. code-block:: python

   class GetMovieValidResponse(Placebo):

       # mock related data. That will be used in tests.
       title = 'matrix'
       year = 1999

       url = 'http://www.omdbapi.com/'
       body = json.dumps({
           'Actors': 'Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving',  # noqa
           'Awards': 'Won 4 Oscars. Another 33 wins & 44 nominations.',
           'Country': 'USA',
           'Director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
           'Genre': 'Action, Sci-Fi',
           'Language': 'English',
           'Metascore': '73',
           'Plot': 'A computer hacker learns from mysterious rebels about the true nature of his reality and his role in the war against its controllers.',  # noqa
           'Poster': 'http://ia.media-imdb.com/images/M/MV5BMTkxNDYxOTA4M15BMl5BanBnXkFtZTgwNTk0NzQxMTE@._V1_SX300.jpg',  # noqa
           'Rated': 'R',
           'Released': '31 Mar 1999',
           'Response': 'True',
           'Runtime': '136 min',
           'Title': 'The Matrix',
           'Type': 'movie',
           'Writer': 'Lilly Wachowski, Lana Wachowski',
           'Year': '1999',
           'imdbID': 'tt0133093',
           'imdbRating': '8.7',
           'imdbVotes': '1,204,431'})
   
       expected_api_response = {'director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
                                'rated': 'R',
                                'language': 'English',
                                'title': 'The Matrix'}


After having all the data in place, we can use our placebo to decorate our test functions like this.

.. code-block:: python

   class omdbapiTests(TestCase):
       """Omdb api test cases"""
   
       expected_movie = {'director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
                         'rated': 'R',
                         'language': 'English',
                         'title': 'The Matrix'}
   
       @GetMovieValidResponse.decorate
       def test_get_movie_valid_response(self):
           movie = get_movie('matrix', 1999)
           self.assertEqual(movie, GetMovieValidResponse.expected_api_response)
   
       @GetMovieValidResponse.decorate(status=500)
       def test_get_movie_500_response(self):
           movie = get_movie('matrix', 1999)
           self.assertEqual(movie, None)


In first method, we directly used the placebo object. In the second method we changed the status of the object to 500 and tested the error case. Notice how logic for mocking the endpoint and test is seperated.

As a matter of fact, placebo object is not only usefull for testing. Since main interface is a decorator pattern,  you can use it on your any function you want, like views in your web application.


INSTALLATION
============

placebo can be installed using pip

.. code-block:: bash

   $ pip install python-placebo

Or source code can be downloaded from github.

USAGE
=====

Basic usage of placebo can be following

.. code-block:: python

   class SimplePlacebo(Placebo):
       url = 'http://www.acme.com/items/'
       body = '[{"id": 1}, {"id": 2}, {"id": 3}]'

When we decorate a function with this placebo object, every 'GET' request to http://www.acme.com/items/ url will return 200 response with following body '[{"id": 1}, {"id": 2}, {"id": 3}]'.

We can use this placebo in following test:

.. code-block:: python

   @SimplePlacebo.decorate
   def test_get_list_valid(self):
       api = ItemAPIClient()
       result = api.get_items()
       self.assertEqual(result,
                        [{"id": 1}, {"id": 2}, {"id": 3}])

Defaut value for status code is 200 and default value for http method is 'GET'. So we did not need to specify those values in our object. If we wanted to specify all fields. We could do something like following:

.. code-block:: python

   class SimplePlaceboWithAllFields(Placebo):
       url = 'http://www.acme.com/items/'
       body = '[{"id": 1}, {"id": 2}, {"id": 3}]'
       status = 200
       method = 'GET'
       headers = {'custom-header': 'custom'}


In placebo class, "url, body, status, method, headers attributes" can be used to define the mock request. method and url is used to figure out which requests should be mocked. Requests that does not match with given url and methods will not go to real backend. "body, status, headers" attributes are used as matching request content.

There are 2 different ways those attributes can be used. First, by adding them to Placebo class. Second is update them on decorator. Following tests updates already defined objects with diffenrt status and body.

.. code-block:: python

    @SimplePlacebo.decorate(status=500)
    def test_get_list_error(self):
        api = ItemAPIClient()
        with self.assertRaises(ItemException):
            api.get_items()

    @SimplePlacebo.decorate(body='invalid-body')
    def test_get_list_invalid_body_error(self):
        api = ItemAPIClient()
        with self.assertRaises(ItemException):
            api.get_items()

Commit message:

Update Basic Usage section in comments section.

doc/index.rst, after:

.. Placebo documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Wed Aug  3 23:50:37 2016.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome to Placebo's documentation!
===================================

Introduction
============

Placebo is a tool for mocking external API's in python applications. It uses httmock or httpretty as mocking backend.


Why this is useful
------------------

Consider following function:

.. code-block:: python

    def get_movie(title, year):
        """Sends a request to omdbapi to get movie data.

        If there is a problem with connection returns None.
        """
        url = 'http://www.omdbapi.com/'

        params = {'t': title,
                  'y': year,
                  'plot': 'short',
                  'r': 'json'}
        response = requests.get(url, params=params)
        if not response.ok:
            return None
        resp = response.json()
        return {
            'language': resp['Language'],
            'director': resp['Director'],
            'rated': resp['Rated'],
            'title': resp['Title']}

Let's think about how we could test this function. A classic way to test this code is
following:


.. code-block:: python

   class RawAPITests(TestCase):
   
       @mock.patch('requests.get')
       def test_get_movie_with_valid_response(self, fake_get):
           fake_response = fake_get.return_value
           fake_response.ok = True
           fake_response.json.return_value = {
               'Actors': 'Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving',  # noqa
               'Awards': 'Won 4 Oscars. Another 33 wins & 44 nominations.',
               'Country': 'USA',
               'Director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
               'Genre': 'Action, Sci-Fi',
               'Language': 'English',
               'Metascore': '73',
               'Plot': 'A computer hacker learns from mysterious rebels about the true nature of his reality and his role in the war against its controllers.',  # noqa
               'Poster': 'http://ia.media-imdb.com/images/M/MV5BMTkxNDYxOTA4M15BMl5BanBnXkFtZTgwNTk0NzQxMTE@._V1_SX300.jpg',  # noqa
               'Rated': 'R',
               'Released': '31 Mar 1999',
               'Response': 'True',
               'Runtime': '136 min',
               'Title': 'The Matrix',
               'Type': 'movie',
               'Writer': 'Lilly Wachowski, Lana Wachowski',
               'Year': '1999',
               'imdbID': 'tt0133093',
               'imdbRating': '8.7',
               'imdbVotes': '1,204,431'}
   
           movie = get_movie('matrix', 1999)
           self.assertEqual(movie,
                            {'director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
                             'rated': 'R',
                             'language': 'English',
                             'title': 'The Matrix'})
   
       @mock.patch('requests.get')
       def test_get_movie_with_500_response(self, fake_get):
           fake_response = fake_get.return_value
           fake_response.ok = False
           fake_response.json.return_value = ''
   
           movie = get_movie('matrix', 1999)
           self.assertEqual(movie, None)

This tests are fine. But they has two main disadvantages. First, code for mocking and actual function invocation is done in the same place which makes it hard to read. Second, if we keep writing similar tests we will probably copy the data for every test.

Purpose of placebo is to separate data from the actual tests. So It would be a lot easier to reason about.

Here is how same code could be implemented with placebo:

First we create a placebo object for that endpoint.


.. code-block:: python

   class GetMovieValidResponse(Placebo):

       # mock related data. That will be used in tests.
       title = 'matrix'
       year = 1999

       url = 'http://www.omdbapi.com/'
       body = json.dumps({
           'Actors': 'Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving',  # noqa
           'Awards': 'Won 4 Oscars. Another 33 wins & 44 nominations.',
           'Country': 'USA',
           'Director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
           'Genre': 'Action, Sci-Fi',
           'Language': 'English',
           'Metascore': '73',
           'Plot': 'A computer hacker learns from mysterious rebels about the true nature of his reality and his role in the war against its controllers.',  # noqa
           'Poster': 'http://ia.media-imdb.com/images/M/MV5BMTkxNDYxOTA4M15BMl5BanBnXkFtZTgwNTk0NzQxMTE@._V1_SX300.jpg',  # noqa
           'Rated': 'R',
           'Released': '31 Mar 1999',
           'Response': 'True',
           'Runtime': '136 min',
           'Title': 'The Matrix',
           'Type': 'movie',
           'Writer': 'Lilly Wachowski, Lana Wachowski',
           'Year': '1999',
           'imdbID': 'tt0133093',
           'imdbRating': '8.7',
           'imdbVotes': '1,204,431'})
   
       expected_api_response = {'director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
                                'rated': 'R',
                                'language': 'English',
                                'title': 'The Matrix'}


After having all the data in place, we can use our placebo to decorate our test functions like this.

.. code-block:: python

   class omdbapiTests(TestCase):
       """Omdb api test cases"""
   
       expected_movie = {'director': 'Lana Wachowski, Lilly Wachowski',
                         'rated': 'R',
                         'language': 'English',
                         'title': 'The Matrix'}
   
       @GetMovieValidResponse.decorate
       def test_get_movie_valid_response(self):
           movie = get_movie('matrix', 1999)
           self.assertEqual(movie, GetMovieValidResponse.expected_api_response)
   
       @GetMovieValidResponse.decorate(status=500)
       def test_get_movie_500_response(self):
           movie = get_movie('matrix', 1999)
           self.assertEqual(movie, None)


In first method, we directly used the placebo object. In the second method we changed the status of the object to 500 and tested the error case. Notice how logic for mocking the endpoint and test is seperated.

As a matter of fact, placebo object is not only usefull for testing. Since main interface is a decorator pattern,  you can use it on your any function you want, like views in your web application.


Installation
============

placebo can be installed using pip

.. code-block:: bash

   $ pip install python-placebo

Or source code can be downloaded from github.

Basic Usage
===========

Basic usage of placebo can be following

.. code-block:: python

   class SimplePlacebo(Placebo):
       url = 'http://www.acme.com/items/'
       body = '[{"id": 1}, {"id": 2}, {"id": 3}]'

When we decorate a function with this placebo class, every 'GET' request to http://www.acme.com/items/ url will return 200 response with following body '[{"id": 1}, {"id": 2}, {"id": 3}]'.

We can use this placebo in following test:

.. code-block:: python

   @SimplePlacebo.decorate
   def test_get_list_valid(self):
       api = ItemAPIClient()
       result = api.get_items()
       self.assertEqual(result,
                        [{"id": 1}, {"id": 2}, {"id": 3}])

Defaut value for status code is 200 and default value for http method is 'GET'. So we did not need to specify those values in our class. If we wanted to specify all fields, we could do something like this:

.. code-block:: python

   class SimplePlaceboWithAllFields(Placebo):
       url = 'http://www.acme.com/items/'
       body = '[{"id": 1}, {"id": 2}, {"id": 3}]'
       status = 200
       method = 'GET'
       headers = {'custom-header': 'custom'}


In placebo class, "url, body, status, method, headers attributes" can be used to define the mock request. method and url is used to figure out which requests should be mocked. Requests that does not match with given url and methods will not go to real backend. "body, status, headers" attributes are used as matching request content.

There are 2 different ways those attributes can be specified. First, by adding them to Placebo class. Second is update them on decorator. Following tests updates already defined class with diffent status and body.

.. code-block:: python

    @SimplePlacebo.decorate(status=500)
    def test_get_list_error(self):
        api = ItemAPIClient()
        with self.assertRaises(ItemException):
            api.get_items()

    @SimplePlacebo.decorate(body='invalid-body')
    def test_get_list_invalid_body_error(self):
        api = ItemAPIClient()
        with self.assertRaises(ItemException):
            api.get_items()
